README.md, before:

# Cream

Clojure + [Crema](https://github.com/nicovank/graal-crema-demo): a native
binary that runs full JVM Clojure with fast startup.

Cream uses GraalVM's Crema (RuntimeClassLoading) to enable runtime `eval`,
`require`, and library loading in a native binary.

> **Warning**: Cream is experimental. It depends on GraalVM Crema (EA) and a
> custom Clojure fork. Do not use in production.

## Quick start

```sh
$ JAVA_HOME=/path/to/jdk ./cream -M -e '(+ 1 2 3)'
6
```

## Loading libraries at runtime

Use `-Scp` to add JARs to the classpath:

```sh
./cream -Scp "$(clojure -Spath -Sdeps '{:deps {org.clojure/data.json {:mvn/version "RELEASE"}}}')" \
  -M -e '(do (require (quote [clojure.data.json :as json])) (json/write-str {:a 1}))'
;; => "{\"a\":1}"
```

## Requirements

Cream may require `JAVA_HOME` pointing to a JDK installation. Crema loads
classes at runtime from the JDK's `lib/modules` (JRT filesystem). Whether
this can be embedded in the binary is an open question (see
[Future work](#future-work)).

```sh
JAVA_HOME=/path/to/jdk ./cream -M -e '(+ 1 2 3)'
```

## Known limitations

- **May not be standalone** — currently requires `JAVA_HOME` at runtime (unlike babashka)
- **Requires a lightly patched Clojure fork** — minor workarounds for Crema
  quirks in `RT.java`, `Var.java`, and `Compiler.java`
  ([details](doc/technical.md#fork-changes))
- **Java enum support broken** — `enum.values()` and `EnumMap` crash in
  Crema's interpreter. Affects http-kit, cheshire, clj-yaml, and other
  libraries using Java enums
- **`Class.forName` not dispatchable** — GraalVM inlines `Class.forName`
  substitutions at call sites, so Crema's interpreter can't dispatch to it.
  The Clojure fork redirects to `RT.classForName` as a workaround, but Java
  `.class` files calling `Class.forName` directly will still fail
- **Large binary** — ~300MB (includes Crema interpreter and preserved packages)
- **Crema is EA** — GraalVM's RuntimeClassLoading is experimental and only
  available in [EA builds](https://github.com/graalvm/oracle-graalvm-ea-builds)

See [doc/technical.md](doc/technical.md) for the full list of known issues and
workarounds.

## Cream vs Babashka

| | Cream | [Babashka](https://babashka.org) |
|---|---|---|
| **Clojure** | Full JVM Clojure (1.13 fork) | SCI interpreter (subset) |
| **Library loading** | Any library from JARs at runtime | Built-in set + pods |
| **Java interop** | Full (runtime class loading) | Limited to compiled-in classes |
| **Startup** | ~20ms | ~5ms |
| **Binary size** | ~300MB | ~30MB |
| **Standalone** | No (`JAVA_HOME` required) | Yes |
| **Maturity** | Experimental | Production-ready |

**When cream might make sense**: you need full Clojure compatibility, arbitrary
library loading, or Java interop beyond what babashka offers.

**When babashka is better**: scripting, tasks, CI glue, or anything where a
standalone binary, fast startup, and a mature ecosystem matter.

## Tested libraries

Libraries are tested against the cream binary using `bb run-lib-tests`.

| Library | CI | Status | Notes |
|---------|:--:|--------|-------|
| [data.csv](https://github.com/clojure/data.csv) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [data.json](https://github.com/clojure/data.json) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [data.xml](https://github.com/clojure/data.xml) | | Works | |
| [core.async](https://github.com/clojure/core.async) | :white_check_mark: | Works | Some test ns skipped (ForkJoinPool segfault) |
| [math.combinatorics](https://github.com/clojure/math.combinatorics) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [tools.reader](https://github.com/clojure/tools.reader) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [medley](https://github.com/weavejester/medley) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [camel-snake-kebab](https://github.com/clj-commons/camel-snake-kebab) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [hiccup](https://github.com/weavejester/hiccup) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [deep-diff2](https://github.com/lambdaisland/deep-diff2) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [malli](https://github.com/metosin/malli) | | Works | |
| [meander](https://github.com/noprompt/meander) | | Works | |
| [selmer](https://github.com/yogthos/Selmer) | | Works | |
| [specter](https://github.com/redplanetlabs/specter) | | Works | |
| [tick](https://github.com/juxt/tick) | | Works | |
| [clj-commons/fs](https://github.com/clj-commons/fs) | | Works | |
| [prismatic/schema](https://github.com/plumatic/schema) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [flatland/useful](https://github.com/flatland/useful) | | Works | |
| [http-kit](https://github.com/http-kit/http-kit) | | Fails | Enum `values()` NPE in Crema |
| [cheshire](https://github.com/dakrone/cheshire) | | Fails | Jackson enum `values()` NPE in Crema |
| [clj-yaml](https://github.com/clj-commons/clj-yaml) | | Fails | SnakeYaml enum NPE in Crema |

Pure Clojure libraries generally work. Libraries using Java interop work when
the relevant packages are preserved. Libraries using Java enums fail due to a
Crema bug ([known limitation](#known-limitations)).

## Building from source

Requires a GraalVM EA build with RuntimeClassLoading support.

1. Install the [custom Clojure fork](https://github.com/borkdude/clojure/tree/crema):
   ```sh
   git clone -b crema https://github.com/borkdude/clojure.git /tmp/clojure-fork
   cd /tmp/clojure-fork && mvn install -Dmaven.test.skip=true
   ```

2. Build the native binary:
   ```sh
   GRAALVM_HOME=/path/to/graalvm bb build-native
   ```

## Future work

- **Standalone binary** — investigate whether JRT metadata can be bundled in
  the binary to eliminate the `JAVA_HOME` requirement
- **Enum support** — blocked on Crema fixing `enum.values()` /
  `InterpreterResolvedObjectType.getDeclaredMethodsList()` NPE. Would unblock
  http-kit, cheshire, clj-yaml
- **Reduce binary size** — currently ~300MB due to preserved packages and
  Crema interpreter overhead
- **nREPL support** — enable interactive development with editor integration

## Documentation

See [doc/technical.md](doc/technical.md) for implementation details,
architecture decisions, and known issues.

## License

Distributed under the EPL License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE).

This project contains code from:
- [Clojure](https://clojure.org), which is licensed under the same EPL License.

Commit message:

Update README: JAVA_HOME only needed for Java interop, not pure Clojure

README.md, after:

# Cream

Clojure + [Crema](https://github.com/nicovank/graal-crema-demo): a native
binary that runs full JVM Clojure with fast startup.

Cream uses GraalVM's Crema (RuntimeClassLoading) to enable runtime `eval`,
`require`, and library loading in a native binary.

> **Warning**: Cream is experimental. It depends on GraalVM Crema (EA) and a
> custom Clojure fork. Do not use in production.

## Quick start

```sh
$ ./cream -M -e '(+ 1 2 3)'
6
```

## Loading libraries at runtime

Use `-Scp` to add JARs to the classpath:

```sh
./cream -Scp "$(clojure -Spath -Sdeps '{:deps {org.clojure/data.json {:mvn/version "RELEASE"}}}')" \
  -M -e '(do (require (quote [clojure.data.json :as json])) (json/write-str {:a 1}))'
;; => "{\"a\":1}"
```

## Requirements

Some Java interop may require `JAVA_HOME` pointing to a JDK installation, as
Crema loads certain classes at runtime from the JDK's `lib/modules` (JRT
filesystem). Pure Clojure code works without `JAVA_HOME`.

## Known limitations

- **May need `JAVA_HOME` for Java interop** — some JDK classes require `JAVA_HOME` at runtime; pure Clojure works without it
- **Requires a lightly patched Clojure fork** — minor workarounds for Crema
  quirks in `RT.java`, `Var.java`, and `Compiler.java`
  ([details](doc/technical.md#fork-changes))
- **Java enum support broken** — `enum.values()` and `EnumMap` crash in
  Crema's interpreter. Affects http-kit, cheshire, clj-yaml, and other
  libraries using Java enums
- **`Class.forName` not dispatchable** — GraalVM inlines `Class.forName`
  substitutions at call sites, so Crema's interpreter can't dispatch to it.
  The Clojure fork redirects to `RT.classForName` as a workaround, but Java
  `.class` files calling `Class.forName` directly will still fail
- **Large binary** — ~300MB (includes Crema interpreter and preserved packages)
- **Crema is EA** — GraalVM's RuntimeClassLoading is experimental and only
  available in [EA builds](https://github.com/graalvm/oracle-graalvm-ea-builds)

See [doc/technical.md](doc/technical.md) for the full list of known issues and
workarounds.

## Cream vs Babashka

| | Cream | [Babashka](https://babashka.org) |
|---|---|---|
| **Clojure** | Full JVM Clojure (1.13 fork) | SCI interpreter (subset) |
| **Library loading** | Any library from JARs at runtime | Built-in set + pods |
| **Java interop** | Full (runtime class loading) | Limited to compiled-in classes |
| **Startup** | ~20ms | ~5ms |
| **Binary size** | ~300MB | ~30MB |
| **Standalone** | Mostly (may need `JAVA_HOME` for Java interop) | Yes |
| **Maturity** | Experimental | Production-ready |

**When cream might make sense**: you need full Clojure compatibility, arbitrary
library loading, or Java interop beyond what babashka offers.

**When babashka is better**: scripting, tasks, CI glue, or anything where a
standalone binary, fast startup, and a mature ecosystem matter.

## Tested libraries

Libraries are tested against the cream binary using `bb run-lib-tests`.

| Library | CI | Status | Notes |
|---------|:--:|--------|-------|
| [data.csv](https://github.com/clojure/data.csv) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [data.json](https://github.com/clojure/data.json) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [data.xml](https://github.com/clojure/data.xml) | | Works | |
| [core.async](https://github.com/clojure/core.async) | :white_check_mark: | Works | Some test ns skipped (ForkJoinPool segfault) |
| [math.combinatorics](https://github.com/clojure/math.combinatorics) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [tools.reader](https://github.com/clojure/tools.reader) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [medley](https://github.com/weavejester/medley) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [camel-snake-kebab](https://github.com/clj-commons/camel-snake-kebab) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [hiccup](https://github.com/weavejester/hiccup) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [deep-diff2](https://github.com/lambdaisland/deep-diff2) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [malli](https://github.com/metosin/malli) | | Works | |
| [meander](https://github.com/noprompt/meander) | | Works | |
| [selmer](https://github.com/yogthos/Selmer) | | Works | |
| [specter](https://github.com/redplanetlabs/specter) | | Works | |
| [tick](https://github.com/juxt/tick) | | Works | |
| [clj-commons/fs](https://github.com/clj-commons/fs) | | Works | |
| [prismatic/schema](https://github.com/plumatic/schema) | :white_check_mark: | Works | |
| [flatland/useful](https://github.com/flatland/useful) | | Works | |
| [http-kit](https://github.com/http-kit/http-kit) | | Fails | Enum `values()` NPE in Crema |
| [cheshire](https://github.com/dakrone/cheshire) | | Fails | Jackson enum `values()` NPE in Crema |
| [clj-yaml](https://github.com/clj-commons/clj-yaml) | | Fails | SnakeYaml enum NPE in Crema |

Pure Clojure libraries generally work. Libraries using Java interop work when
the relevant packages are preserved. Libraries using Java enums fail due to a
Crema bug ([known limitation](#known-limitations)).

## Building from source

Requires a GraalVM EA build with RuntimeClassLoading support.

1. Install the [custom Clojure fork](https://github.com/borkdude/clojure/tree/crema):
   ```sh
   git clone -b crema https://github.com/borkdude/clojure.git /tmp/clojure-fork
   cd /tmp/clojure-fork && mvn install -Dmaven.test.skip=true
   ```

2. Build the native binary:
   ```sh
   GRAALVM_HOME=/path/to/graalvm bb build-native
   ```

## Future work

- **Fully standalone binary** — investigate whether JRT metadata can be bundled
  in the binary to eliminate the `JAVA_HOME` requirement for Java interop
- **Enum support** — blocked on Crema fixing `enum.values()` /
  `InterpreterResolvedObjectType.getDeclaredMethodsList()` NPE. Would unblock
  http-kit, cheshire, clj-yaml
- **Reduce binary size** — currently ~300MB due to preserved packages and
  Crema interpreter overhead
- **nREPL support** — enable interactive development with editor integration

## Documentation

See [doc/technical.md](doc/technical.md) for implementation details,
architecture decisions, and known issues.

## License

Distributed under the EPL License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE).

This project contains code from:
- [Clojure](https://clojure.org), which is licensed under the same EPL License.
